# Chapter 1: Introduction to PHP

# Basic Syntax

PHP is an *HTML-embedded scripting language*, meaning that you can intermingle PHP and HTML code within the same file.

To add PHP code to a page, place it within PHP tags:

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html lang="en-us"> 
      <head>
          <meta charset="utf-8">        
      </head>
      <body>        
          <?php
          ?>
      </body>
    </html>     

Anything within `<?php?>` is processed by the PHP interpreter.  PHP files must have the extension of `.php`.


## To make a basic PHP script:
1. Create a new file, `first.php`
2. Create a basic HTML document
3. Before the closing `body` tag, insert the PHP tags: `<?php?>` 
4. Save the file
# Sending Data to the Browser

The most common functions to send data to the browser are `echo` and `print`; I prefer `echo`.


    echo 'Hello world!';
    echo "What's new?";

In PHP, all lines must end with a semicolon.  You can use both single and double quotes.  To escape characters, use the backslash.


    echo 'I\'m an escaped character.'

Both `echo` and `print` can be used over multiple lines.

    echo 'This sentence is
    printed over two lines.';
# Writing Comments

PHP comments are **not** visible in the source code along with the HTML.  PHP supports three comment syntaxes:

    # This is a comment.
    // This is also a comment
    /* This is a longer comment
    that spans two lines.*/

Often, you will be creating HTML with PHP like so:


    echo '<p>This is a line of text.<br>This is another line of text.</p>';
# What are Variables?

Variables temporarily store values.  PHP supports eight types of variable: Boolean, integer, floating point, strings, arrays, objects, and NULL.

All variables in PHP follow certain syntactical rules:

- Must start with a dollar sign (`$`) (e.g., `$name`)
- Can contain a combination of letters, numbers, and underscores (e.g., `$my_report1`)
- First character after the dollar sign must be either a letter or an underscore
- Variable names are case sensitive

PHP has some predefined variables such as `$_SERVER`.


    $file = $_SERVER['SCRIPT_FILENAME'];
    $user = $_SERVER['HTTP_USER_AGENT'];
    $server = $_SERVER['SERVER_SOFTWARE'];

To assign a value to a variable, use the `=` operator:

    $name = 'Matthew';

To print a variable, use the `echo` or `print` functions.  To include variables within a string, use double quotes.


    echo $name; // Matthew
    echo "Hello, $name" // Hello, Matthew

PHP is casual in how it treats variables, meaning that you don’t need to set an immediate value or specify a data type.

# Introducing Strings

A string is merely a quoted chunk of characters.

- ‘Tobias’
- “In watermelon sugar”
- ’100’
- ‘August 2, 2017’


    $name = 'Matthew';

If you assign another value, such as a string, to an existing variable, the new value will override the old one:


    $book = 'High Fidelity';
    $book = 'The Corrections';
    echo $book; // The Corrections


# Concatenating Strings

*Concatenation* is like adding for strings, whereby characters are added to the end of a string.  It is performed using the *concatenation operator*, which is the period `.`


    $city = 'Chicago';
    $state = 'Illinois';
    $city_state = $city . ', ' . $state;

PHP has many string-specific functions such as the following:

- `strlen()` calculates the length of the string
- `strtolower()` makes the entire string lowercase
- `strtoupper()` makes the entire string uppercase
- `ucfirst()` capitalizes the first word of a string
- `ucwords()` capitalizes each word in a string

If you are merely concatenating one value to another, you can use the concatenation assignment operator (`.=`):


    $address = 'Chicago';
    $address .= ' ';
    $address .= 'Illinois';

Use the [PHP manual](http://php.net/manual) to see every function and feature in the PHP language.

# Introducing Numbers

Although PHP has both integers and floating points, they both can be classified under the generic title *numbers*.  Here are some examples of numbers:

- 8
- 3.14
- 109012904852
- -1.44424
- 4.4e2

There are many built-in functions for numbers, including `round()` and `number_format()`. 


    round(3.14) // 3
    round(3.141592, 3) // 3.142
    number_format(20900) // 20,900
    number_format(500, 2) // 500.00

PHP supports a maximum integer of around 2 billion.  With numbers larger than that, PHP will automatically use a floating-point type.

Many of the mathematical operators (e.g., `+,-*,/,%,++,--`) have a corresponding assignment operator, letting you create a shorthand for assigning values. 


    $total = $total + ($total * $taxrate);
    $total += $total * $taxrate; 

Both of the above expressions are the same.

PHP 7 has an `intdiv()` function, which returns the integer quotient of a division:


    echo 7 / 3; // 2.33333333333
    echo intdiv(7, 3) // 2
# Introducing Constants

Constants, like variables, are used to temporarily store values.  Use the `define()` function to create a function:


    define('USERNAME', 'dan');
    define('PI', 3.14);

Unlike variables, a constant’s value cannot be changed.

The following operation will not work on constants:


    echo "Hello, USERNAME";

PHP has predefined constants such as `PHP_VERSION` and `PHP_OS`.

An example using constants:


    define('TODAY', '23 February 2018');
    echo 'Today is ' . TODAY;


# Single vs. Double Quotation Marks

In PHP, values enclosed within single quotation marks will be treated literally, whereas those within double quotation marks will be interpreted.


    $var = 'foobar';
    
    echo "Var is equal to $var."; // Var is equal to foobar. (INTERPRETED)
    echo 'Var is equal to $var.'; // Var is equal to $var. (LITERAL)

Single quotes will display exactly what you type, except for the escaped single quote (`\``'`) and the escaped backlash (`\\`).

# Basic Debugging Steps
- Make sure you’re running PHP through a URL `http://` …duh?
- Check the version of PHP using `PHP_VERSION`
- Make sure `display_errors` is on
- Check the HTML source code for PHP error messages

