# Chapter 2: Programming with PHP

# Creating an HTML Form

First you create the HTML form itself, and then you create the corresponding PHP script that will receive and process the form data.


    <form method="POST" action="script.php"></form>

Each input within the form should have a name associated with them so they can be used in the backend.  The `method` attribute of a form dictates how the data is sent to the handling page.  The two options are *GET* and *POST*.  

The *GET* method sends the submitted data to the receiving page as a series of name-value pairs like so:


    http://example.com/script.php?name=Homer&gender=M&age=35

Using *GET* has some benefits.  For instance, the URL can be bookmarked and you can navigate back to the form, however, there is a limit of the amount of data that can be transferred and it is less secure.  

# Handling an HTML Form

Say you have a form input like so:


    <input type="text" name="city">

Whatever is typed in there is accessible via the `$_REQUEST` variable: `$_REQUEST['city']`.  The `$_REQUEST` variable is a super global that stores all the data sent to PHP either by *GET* or *POST* as well as data accessible in cookies.

# Conditionals and Operators

PHP’s three primary terms for creating conditionals are `if`, `else`, and `elseif`.


    if (condition) {
     // Do something!
    } elseif {
     // Or do something else.
    } else {
     // Do this otherwise.
    }

A condition can be true if:

- `$var` has a value other than 0, an empty string, `FALSE`, or `NULL`
- `isset($var)`, if `$var` has any value other than `NULL`, including 0, `FALSE`, or an empty string.
- `TRUE, true, True`, etc

The `isset()` function returns `True` if the provided variable is “set,” meaning it is anything but `NULL`.

## Comparison and Logical Operators
| **Symbol** | **Meaning**              |
| ---------- | ------------------------ |
| ==         | is equal to              |
| !=         | is not equal to          |
| <          | less than                |
| >          | greater than             |
| <=         | less than or equal to    |
| >=         | greater than or equal to |
| !          | not                      |
| &&         | and                      |
| and        | and                      |
| ||         | or                       |
| or         | or                       |
| xor        | exclusive or             |

PHP has a `switch` statement, which is best used in place of a long `if-elseif-else` clause.


    switch($var) {
      case 'value1':
        // Do this
        break;
      case 'value2':
        // Do this instead
        break;
      default:
        // Do this then
        break;
    }
# Validating Form Data

One standard function is `isset()`, which tests if a variable has a value other than `NULL`.  To check if a user typed something, use `empty()`.  It checks if a variable has an *empty* value: an empty string, 0, NULL, or FALSE.

The goals of form validation are to see if something was entered and if it was the correct type.


## The NULL Coalescing Operator

New in PHP 7, the NULL coalescing operator (`??`), simplifies checking if a variable is set.  Consider this common condition:


    if(isset($_REQUEST['gender'])) {
      $gender = $_REQUEST['gender'];
    } else {
      $gender = null;
    }

It can be simplified with:


    $gender = $_REQUEST['gender'] ?? NULL;

If `$_REQUEST['gender']` has a value, assign it to `$gender`; otherwise, assign `NULL` to `$gender`.

To check if a submitted value is a number, use the `is_numeric()` function.

# Introducing Arrays

An array can hold multiple separate pieces of information.  The values can be strings, numbers, or even another array.  They are structured as key-value pairs, where one pair is an item or *element* of that array.  For each item in the list, there is a key (or *index*) associated with it.

There are two types of arrays: indexed (numbered keys) and associative (string keys):


    $band = $artists[0]; // first item in an indexed array
    echo $states['MD']; // value in an associative array with the key "MD"

You cannot print an element in an associative array without brackets; you must use brackets.

    echo "IL is $states['IL']."; // BAD!
    echo "IL is {$states['IL']}."; // GOOD!
## Superglobal Arrays

PHP superglobal arrays include: `$_GET, $_POST, $_REQUEST, $_SERVER, $_ENV, $_SESSION, $_COOKIE`.

Although you can access data though `$_REQUEST`, `$_POST` will be more accurate.


## Creating arrays
    $band[] = 'Jemaine';
    $band[] = 'Bret';
    $band[] = 'Murray';
    
    $band['fan'] = 'Mel';
    $band['fan'] = 'Dave'; // new value
    
    $fruit[2] = 'appple';

Instead of adding one element at a time, you can use the `array()` function to build an entire array in one step:


    $states = array(
      'IA' => 'Iowa',
      'MD' => 'Maryland'
    );
    
    $artists = array('Clem Snide', 'Shins', 'Eels');
    
    $days = array(1 => 'Sun', 'Mon', 'Tues'); // set first index to 1 rather than 0
    echo $days[1]; // 'Sun'
    echo $days[3]; // 'Tues'

The `array()` function is also used to initialize an array prior to referencing it (although not required):


    $tv = array();
    $tv[] = 'Flight of the Conchords';

You can also use brackets instead of the `array()` function:


    $states = [
      'IA' => 'Iowa',
      'MD' => 'Maryland'
    ];
    
    $artists = ['Clem Snide', 'Shins', 'Eels'];
    
    $days = array[1 => 'Sun', 'Mon', 'Tues']; // set first index to 1 rather than 0
    echo $days[1]; // 'Sun'
    echo $days[3]; // 'Tues'

If you want to create an array of sequential numbers, you can use `range()`.


    $ten = range(1, 10);


## Accessing entire arrays

To access every array element, use the `foreach` loop:


    foreach($array as $value) {
      // Do something with $value
    }

To access both keys and values, use


    foreach ($array as $key => $value) {
      // Do something with $key and $value
    }

To determine the number of elements in an array, use `count()`.  The `range()` function can also create a range of letters (a-z):  `range(``'``a``'``,` `'``z``'``)`.  An array’s key can include spaces (e.g., `first name`).  The `is_array()` function confirms if the provided argument is an array.

## Multidimensional arrays

An array consisting of other arrays is *multidimensional*. 


    $primes = [2, 3, 5, 7];
    $sphenic = [30, 42, 66, 70];
    
    $numbers = ['Primes' => $primes, 'Sphenic' => $sphenic];
    
    echo $numbers['Primes'][0]; // 2

Multidimensional arrays can also come from HTML form elements with the same `name` attribute:


    <input type="text" name="interests[]" value="Music"> Music
    <input type="text" name="interests[]" value="Movies"> Movies
    <input type="text" name="interests[]" value="Books"> Books

The `$_POST` variable in the receiving PHP page will be multidimensional.


    echo $_POST['interests'][0] // music
## Sorting arrays
    $names = ['Moe', 'Larry', 'Curly'];
    sort($names);

If the key-value relationship is important, don’t use `sort()` because the array’s keys will be reset.  If you want to sort an array and maintain the keys, use `asort()`.  If you want to sort arrays be keys, use `ksort()`.  To sort in reverse order, use the `rsort(), arsort(), and krsort()` respectively. 

## Arrays and Strings

PHP has two functions to convert between arrays and strings.


    $array = explode('-', 'Mon-Tue-Wed'); // ['Mon', 'Tues', 'Wed']
    $string = implode(' ', ['hello', 'world']); // 'hello world' 

To randomize the order of an array, use `shuffle()`.


# For and While Looops

The `while` loop looks like this:


    while (condition) {
     // Do something
    }

The `for` loops looks like this:


    for (initial expression; condition; closing expression) {
     // Do something
    }

Use the `while` loop when doing something for an unknown number of times and use the `for` loop when you want to control how long you want to loop for.

